---
layout: post
title: Measuring and Analyzing ERPs
published: true
category: Work
---

Part of my work as a PhD candidate consists of measuring and analyzing
brain waves. We do this by conducting so-called "ERPs", i.e.
"event-related potentials". We record the EEG (Electroencephalogram)
of participants and time-lock it to stimuli, the events. In order to
get only the information that relates to the stimulus, a lot of
repetitions are necessary.  The brain waves of all those repetitions
are then averaged, which filters out the "noise" as this is random and
leaves only the constant reaction to our stimulus.

As you can read on my ["current project" site](http://doerte.eu/Research/current) I am interested in the perception
of speech sounds in individuals with aphasia, an acquired language
disorder. In my experiment the participants are asked to watch a
sequence of videos of someone uttering syllables. These can be
so-called standard (occurring in 80% of the trials) or deviant
(occurring in the other 20%) stimuli. They differ by only the initial
speech sound (pa vs. ta or ka). On encountering a deviant stimulus
participants should push a button. Whenever a new stimulus is started
a marker is sent to the EEG, so the EEG can be related to the stimuli
later on.

However when I want to analyze my data I'm facing some problems: The
marker denotes the onset of the video in which the stimulus is
displayed, but not the onset of the sound, like I would
need. Furthermore I have way too many standards compared to the
deviants.

So I decided I want only the standard stimuli that occur directly
before a deviant one.  This makes sense for 2 reasons: I will
definitely get the same amount of standard and deviant stimuli and I
will get the most standard standards...What I mean here, is that the
last standard of a row of standards is the least new and therefore it
has the biggest contrast to the surprising deviants that occur only
every now and then.

Also I wanted to move the marker to the onset of the sound or actually
add a marker there.  Fortunately the speech always starts at the same
time after the onset of the video.  This made my task a lot
easier. Basically all I want is an additional marker x milliseconds
after the other marker. Another good thing is that the markers are
stored in a simple text file with a quite basic structure. Below
there's an example of the first rows of every marker file.  First it
is specified that it is a marker file and to what .eeg file it
belongs. Furthermore there's some information about the coding and
then there's one row per marker. For each marker it is specified what
number it has (just counting upwards), what kind of marker it is, what
is put down in the eeg as information, at what data point the marker
is placed, how big it is (usually 0) and to which electrode channels
it applies.

    Brain Vision Data Exchange Marker File, Version 1.0

    [Common Infos]
    Codepage=UTF-8
    DataFile=3_1_Tones.eeg

    [Marker Infos]
    ; Each entry: Mk<Marker number>=<Type>,<Description>,<Position in data points>,
    ; <Size in data points>, <Channel number (0 = marker is related to all channels)>
    ; Fields are delimited by commas, some fields might be omitted (empty).
    ; Commas in type or description text are coded as "\1".
    Mk1=New Segment,,1,1,0,20100331151632436646
    Mk2=Stimulus,S  1,259,0,0
    Mk3=Stimulus,S  9,510,0,0
    Mk4=Stimulus,S 15,512,0,0
    Mk5=Stimulus,S  1,636,0,0
    Mk6=Stimulus,S  9,887,0,0
    Mk7=Stimulus,S 15,889,0,0


As you can see I have different markers of the category "stimulus":
S1, S9 and S15 in this example. S1 marks the onset of the video and is
the one I was concerned about. S9 and S15 correspond to the actual
response given by the participant. Those are sent to the EEG after the
end of the stimulus.

In order to change my markers in the way I wanted, I wrote a Ruby
program that reads the input from the original marker file, processes
it like I want (keep only deviants and standards before deviants and
add the sound-onset marker) and writes them to a new file.

If you're curious about this small program (which is still under
constant revision to improve the functionality and the efficiency) you
can check it out on
[github](http://github.com/doerte/LearningRuby/blob/master/triggersNeu.rb)

If you have any ideas on how to improve the program or comments about
it or questions, please let me know! It cost me quite some time to
write it (as I'm still a beginner in Ruby), but doing it all by hand
would have been just as time-consuming and a lot more boring than
writing this program!
